    
 
         Making Salami at Home 
  
The differences between the various types of salami  are 
due to the kind of meat they contain, the proportio n of 
lean to fat, and the fineness or coarseness of the grind. 
Salami can be exclusively pork, or be a mixture of pork 
and beef, but they can also be made with venison or  other 
game meats, poultry, goose, lamb and goat. Generall y the 
ratio is 70% lean and 30% fat, but that may vary 
depending of the recipe or style being made. Italia n 
salami are different from region to region; they ca n be 
un-smoked or smoked, each with their own formulas, 
curing and maturation. There are two types Italian 
salami most familiar to Americans. The fine- grind type of 
salami that is similar to that made in Milan contai ning 
black pepper; the other is Soppressata, a coarse gr ind 
salami, often with red pepper, similar to the type found in 
Naples.  
The Raw Materials:  
The meats used in 
salami making 
should be kept at a 
temperature of 36°F  
in order to minimize 
any increase of the 
microorganisms 
brought on 
butchering and 
handling the meat. I 
prefer to use pork 
shoulder butts when 
the recipe calls for pork, beef chuck when beef is used. 
For fat, I prefer to use what is termed pork back f at, 
which is the fat trimmed of the loin area of the pi g; 
Page 1 of 9 Introduction to Making Salami 
7/21/2008 http://home.pacbell.net/lpoli/page0002.htm 
another choice would be "fat bellies.  
When preparing your own formula, remember to compen sate for the fat in a 
pork shoulder (often called Boston butts) which can  contain approximately 20% 
fat.  If you have access to a butcher that prepares  primal cuts from slaughtered 
animals, you may be able to order bull or cow meat;  not because its cheaper, but 
because the biochemical makeup of the muscle from o lder, leaner animals is best 
for making salami.  
The Meat Paste:   
The preparation of the meat paste begins with grind ing the raw materials. 
Remove and discard as much sinew as possible from t he meats. Keep the meats as 
cold as possible and grind the meat and fat separat ely. The dimensions of the 
grind will depend upon the style of salami you wish  to make; for example, to 
make Soppressata or a Toscano style, choose a mediu m to large grind, whereas, a 
Milan style would require that the meat require tha t the meat be ground to a fine 
grain.  
Pastes that are a medium or large grind, can be mix ed with the salt and other 
ingredients fairly aggressively since the final pro duct will not have a 
homogeneous texture of fat to lean. However, the fa t in fine ground pastes can  
become excessively smeared during the mixing and bl ending stage if it is not kept 
very cold. Of the many variables in making salami, one of the most important is 
the temperature of the fat and the meats. Try to ke ep meats at 36°F  (preferably a 
degree or two cooler).   
I prepare the meat by cutting it into 1 to 1- 1/2 inch cubes.  Then I put them in the 
freezer until they are partially frozen; then I gri nd them to the desired 
consistency, returning them to the freezer while I prepare the fat, which I handle 
the same way.  
  
Additives:  
Immediately after mixing the meat with the salt and  other additives the meat 
paste begins its transformation to salami.  The add itives need to be well 
amalgamated into the meat paste for the sausage to have a consistent taste 
throughout.  Mixing should be done under the most s trict sanitary conditions; if 
you mix by hand, use latex surgical gloves to prote ct your skin from absorbing 
the additives!  
  
Salt : The salt is essential because it is involved in t he biochemical Page 2 of 9 Introduction to Making Salami 
7/21/2008 http://home.pacbell.net/lpoli/page0002.htm 
activities we call curing as well as the inhibition  of some microorganisms 
found in the meat. The salt makes the proteins in t he meat soluble, 
causing a sticky film (myosin) to form around the f at particles which in 
turn creates a stable emulsion. Salt is also necess ary for the dehydration 
of the meat paste which also prevents growth of foo d-spoilage 
microorganisms.  
Nitrite : In addition to the salt, nitrite is added for the  inhibition and the 
selection certain bacteria found in the meat. In dr y cured products, a 
mixture of both nitrite and nitrate are added to th e meat. You 
sometimes see formulas that call for saltpeter (pot assium nitrate). The 
current trend is to move away from saltpeter and us e sodium 
nitrite/nitrate mixtures. In reality, the nitrate, to be useful in curing, 
must be converted to nitrite...this is accomplished  by bacteria 
(Micrococcus,  for example) present in the meat paste. Nitrite is  used up 
quickly in the curing process so such a mixture is added to dry-cured 
meats to ensure a supply of nitrite in the later st ages of maturation. The 
nitrite is particularly effective in the inhibition  of Clostridium  bacteria, 
which causes botulism. It also helps keep the meat an appealing red 
color.  
Starter Cultures:  
 
I recommend the use of a starter culture 
in order to control the myriad of 
microorganisms that may be in ground 
meat, especially food-spoilage 
microorganisms. Starter cultures can be 
difficult to find in small quantities; I’ve 
used one ( Pediococcus)  from Butcher-
Packer [ see links ], they sell a freeze 
dried packet in 40 gram quantities.  I’ve 
used both Pediococcus cerevisiae  and Lactobacillus plantarum ...I prefer 
the taste of the plantarum.   The lactic bacteria i ncludes species that are 
essential to the production of many foods we enjoy,  such as, cheeses, 
yogurt, beer, and sourdough bread to name a few. Th e lactic bacteria 
used in salami making are salt tolerant and produce  lactic acid from the 
dextrose in the meat paste, which has the effect of  lowering the pH (or 
raising the acidity).  This lowered pH is a hostile  environment for 
spoilage bacteria, thereby minimizing their growth.  
Spices : The purpose of the spices is to impart the desire d the taste and 
aromas that the salami maker prefers. In the majori ty of the cases, 
Italian salami is often flavored with black pepper,  cracked or ground, 
Page 3 of 9 Introduction to Making Salami 
7/21/2008 http://home.pacbell.net/lpoli/page0002.htm 
wine infused with crushed garlic, red pepper or fen nel seeds. It is 
absolutely essential that you use fresh spices for consistent results.  If 
your ground spices are more  than  6 months  old , through  them  out  and 
purchase new ones.  It is always better to purchase  whole, un-ground 
spices and grind them yourself as needed...you'll b e surprised by the 
difference!  
  
  
The Maturation Process:  
  
In my opinion, the maturation of salami can be thou ght of 
being subdivided in three distinct phases: Curing , Incubating , 
Drying ...all of which require different temperatures and 
relative humidity conditions. Depending upon the ty pe of 
product that is intended, this process may last  21  or more days  
  
 
  
I. The Curing Phase : This is the beginning of the 
maturation process. This phase begins immediately u pon 
the addition of salt. In the old, traditional metho d, after 
grinding and mixing, the paste was put under 
refrigeration for approximately 24- 48 hours (depending 
upon the recipe being used). In the modern producti on of 
salami, this refrigeration period has been replaced  by 
immediate fermentation at 85 oF or higher because of the 
addition of a lactic acid bacterial starter culture s added to 
the salami paste. This has the effect of lowering t he acid 
content of the meat to a point were many harmful 
bacteria are inhibited.  
It's helpful for me to keep notes on the entire pro cess in 
order to help me evaluate the final product.  Bioch emical 
reactions occur between the salt and the muscle pro teins. Page 4 of 9 Introduction to Making Salami 
7/21/2008 http://home.pacbell.net/lpoli/page0002.htm 
 
  
 
  
The curing reactions are quite complicated and requ ire 
some knowledge of biochemistry. The important thing  to 
understand is that it is the salt and the curing sa lts that 
are responsible for curing the meat. The salt 
concentration should never be reduced in order to l imit 
your intake of sodium.  Besides curing the meat, sa lt and 
cure  are necessary to kill any trichina worms that  may be 
in the muscle meats. Generally, the concentration o f salt 
is minimally 3.5% of the weight of the ground meat 
before any ingredients are added. The aging or 
maturation process is strictly defined by the USDA , and 
the reader is directed to review this document.  
When the curing time is over, the meat paste is stu ffed 
into casings and tied. The casing used must allow 
moisture  to escape the salami during drying.  The choices 
for casings are astonishing. They fall into two cat egories: 
natural and artificial. The artificial casings can be 
collagen (some edible others not) or fibrous; the n atural 
can be intestine, bladder, stomach or esophagus fro m 
beef, pork or sheep.  In Europe, horse and donkey 
innards can also be used in some countries.  
I use a natural casing called a "beef middle". The size I 
use makes salami of 2- 1/2 inches in diameter, stuffed. 
They are packed in salt and will keep for many mont hs in 
the refrigerator. I like to use natural casing for two 
reasons: they give the salami an "old world" look a nd 
they contribute to the overall taste of the salami.  I also 
believe the salami dries more evenly and consistent ly with 
natural casings.  If you're going to spend money fo r 
casings, you might as well get the kind you can eat !  The Page 5 of 9 Introduction to Making Salami 
7/21/2008 http://home.pacbell.net/lpoli/page0002.htm 
 
 
 
  
advantage of artificial casings are that they are e asy to 
store, they are a consistent size, and they don't s mell!  
II. The Incubation Phase : The stuffed salami is incubated 
at 85°F - 90°F from 1 to 2 days...again depending upon 
the recipe. The relative humidity is kept at 75% -85% 
(although some formulations require as high as 90% 
R/H). I use a converted old freezer cabinet that I modified 
and set the thermostat to maintain 85°F and 9-85- 90% 
R/H.  
This temperature is ideal for bacterial growth, so the 
salami maker must use all possible means to favor t he 
beneficial and hinder the spoilage bacteria by usin g a 
lactic acid bacteria starter culture. As you can im agine, 
the ground meats contain a whole host of bacteria; some 
beneficial, others harmful. One of these harmful ba cteria 
can be Clostridium  botulinum,  which produces a toxin that 
causes botulism in humans.  Sodium nitrite is added  to 
dry cured salami in order to kill this organism, th erefore 
it is an essential ingredient in the amounts regula ted by 
USDA ; too little and it won't control botulism; too muc h 
and it may kill you! Lactobacilli in starter cultur es 
ferment the sugars in the paste, producing lactic a cid, 
among other things. This has be shown to successful ly 
hinder the growth of harmful bacteria by lowering t he pH 
(increasing the acidity) of the meats.  
III.  The Drying Phase : After incubation, the salami are 
dried in order to lower the water content of the me at. At 
the conclusion of this drying phase,  the salami ca n be 
held without refrigeration. The drying may lasts 30  days 
or more depending upon the diameter of the salami. Page 6 of 9 Introduction to Making Salami 
7/21/2008 http://home.pacbell.net/lpoli/page0002.htm 
 
Large diameter salami, stuffed in beef bungs may re quire 
65 days! During this phase the salami will loose be tween 
35% to 45% of its water. The reduced availability o f 
water prevents growth of spoilage bacteria. The 
temperature during this phase is generally 55- 65°F with a 
relative humidity of 70- 80%.  The maintenance of this 
high humidity is necessary to prevent case hardenin g. 
That occurs when the outer circumference of the sal ami 
dries faster than the interior. An excessive superf icial 
drying can also cause the formation of interior cav ities 
within the salami and a general loss of compactness  of the 
meat.  
During this time, the casing of the salami will mol d. This 
is natural and some say it imparts complexity to th e 
flavor of the salami. If this is objectionable to y ou,  rub 
the salami (when completely mature)  with a cloth t o 
partially remove the mold and dust it with rice flo ur.  
  
  
 
  
A word about “salami mold ”: Old world style salami are generally covered with a  
fine white mold.  This is considered extremely desi rable characteristic in both 
European and San Francisco style dry-cured products .  See Salami War .  
There are two major groups of micro- organisms that contribute to this bloom: 
Yeasts and Molds. The very first organisms to appea r after fermentation are 
single celled yeasts.  They form a slightly "sticky " film over the surface of the 
casing. I have not yet been able to identify the ex act species of yeast. When I do, 
I'll posts it here.   
A few days after the growth of yeast, assuming the temperature and humidity of 
the recipe is adhered to, the appearance of a fine white mold begins to grow, 
supplanting the yeast cells. This mold will grow an d mature over the coarse of the Page 7 of 9 Introduction to Making Salami 
7/21/2008 http://home.pacbell.net/lpoli/page0002.htm 
aging period. Is is edible...I can only say that if  grown on natural casings, I've 
eaten it with absolutely no ill effects.  Its up to  you to decide!  
Fungal species of the genus Penicillium  are a frequently used as commercial 
starter cultures for mold ripened foods, especially  cheeses. Penicillium roqueforti, 
for example , is used in cheese to develop characteristic blue ve ins such as in 
Roquefort Blue, Danish Blue, Gorgonzola, Stilton an d other blue style cheeses. It 
is common practice to use mold starters for salami- type products, especially in 
Europe…. after stuffing, the salami casings are sprayed or d ipped in the mold 
culture before they are sent off for fermentation.  Three species of these fungi, P 
notatum, P. nalgiovense and P. chrysogenum  have been isolated from both 
European and U.S. dry- cured salami.  These molds help in flavor developme nt by 
decomposing excess lactic acid and inhibiting the g rowth of other undesirable 
molds.  
P. notatum was the first species of fungus that is used to com mercially  produce the 
antibiotic penicillin . From the physiologic, as well as the genetic, 
point of view P. notatum seems to be related very closely to P. 
chrysogenum and P. nalgiovense since these also both producers 
of the a-lactam antibiotic penicillin; all three co ntain the same 
gene sequence necessary for biosynthesis of penicil lin. Starter 
cultures of these organisms are now available in sm all quantites 
here in the U.S. You can purchase them from Butcher -Packer 
Company. See Resources page for the link.  
I incubate, as well as dry, my salami in an old fre ezer. I purchased  a discarded 
freezer from the landfill and removed the motor and  innards and power washed it 
and wiped it out with a 10% bleach solution. I was thinking of putting a 
humidifier and humidistat in the box, but I found t hat a large pan of water gives 
me about 80- 85% relative humidity.  The unit in my garage and s tays relatively 
cool.  I  monitor the temperature and humidity from  the house by using a cable -
free temperature and humidity unit from Oregon Scie ntific.  I live in Sonoma,  
California and today (July 1) the air temperature w as 98°F, but the box was 65°F.  
I'm thinking of installing a very small computer- type fan, just to create a slight air 
current.  
Addendum:  Since the original page was written, I was lucky e nough to have a 
used "walk- in" refrigeration box given to me.  Seems the origi nal owner needed a 
bigger walk- in, so I got his old box. This is perfect for dryin g and holding cured 
salami. Ask around and maybe you'll get lucky! Now I've converted the old 
freezer used for drying to function as an incubator . More information on the 
project is on the page titled "Tips".  
  
Page 8 of 9 Introduction to Making Salami 
7/21/2008 http://home.pacbell.net/lpoli/page0002.htm 
Copyright © 2001 - 2008 by Len Poli Sonoma Mountain  Sausages All rights reserved 
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
Home  | Introduction  | Making Salami  | Formulations  | Resources  | Production Photos  | Tips  
  Page 9 of 9 Introduction to Making Salami 
7/21/2008 http://home.pacbell.net/lpoli/page0002.htm 